(hard rock music)
All right, in this one, we are going to be,
sort of, styling a different blog layout.
One of the, kinda, cool things about CSS Grid
is that it's good for application and layout,
but it's also good for just laying out text on a page.
So, this is what we have here,
where we've got some headings,
we've got some paragraph texts,
and then we have these things that I like to call tips,
where you can put them to the right or to the left.
They've got some quotes, and some images,
that sort of spill out.
I like to call this sort of full bleed.
It goes all the way past where the text might be.
And you can put stuff to the left and to the right,
and some bigger images.
So, let's jump into it.
Let's take a quick look at what we've got here
in the html.
We'll go to full bleed blog start.
And we've got an article, the class of post.
And then, inside of that,
we just have, like, a normal html that might be spit out by,
like, a WordPress, or any other CMS that you might have.
The only, like, interesting thing is that
we have these div with the class of tip.
And it could be anything with the class of tip, actually,
but I'd like to put a paragraph tag inside of it,
so I used a div.
And then, tip and tip-right, or tip-left,
and they will go across,
and then we also have figures with images and figcaptions,
to the bottom of that.
So, we'll open up the full bleed here,
and this is sort of what it looks like by default.
I've just styled the text to be specific black,
and some italics on the H1.
So, the way it's going to work is that
we are going to take the post, and make it a grid,
and then we're gonna make it into three columns,
in that most of the content is going
to take up the center column,
that's what this text is going to be,
and then, occasionally, things, like images,
are going to span themselves all three across.
So, we'll go ahead and grab our post,
and we'll display: grid right on that specific post.
Let's also open up our dev tools here,
and turn on the grid dev tools for what we have.
I'm gonna put a max width of 1000px on the container,
and then I'm going to center it.
I'm going to put 200 pixels on top and bottom,
and auto, we're gonna center it.
There we go. Looking pretty good.
Now we're gonna split this up into three columns,
and if we look at what we got here,
it's split up into, they're not perfectly columns,
as I like to annoy people
who like things perfectly centered.
But we have a bit of a column here.
You've got your main column here,
and then a bit of one here.
The way that I, sort of, did it initially was,
I said grid-template-column,
and I was like maybe the first will be 15 percent,
and the second one will be 60 percent,
and then the third one will be 25 percent,
and we'll give that a save.
And that will work pretty well.
The problems comes when you start to add grid-gap,
where you wanna have 20px.
Now, all of the sudden, we're over-budget.
And if we start to resize this thing
to be a little bit smaller than 1000 pixels,
we start to get this dreaded horizontal scroll.
And why is that?
Well, the reason behind that is because
we are adding up to a hundred percent,
and then we're adding grid-gap of 20px,
and grid-gap works just like margin,
where it will add to it.
It will not take away from these values.
So, what we wanna do is actually switch these over
to fr units.
And I sort of just thought, oh!
These are all kind of base five,
so, 15 percent could really just be 3fr.
And these things are just proportional,
so I can do whatever I want.
That will be 12fr, and this would be 5fr.
And then everything will add up,
regardless of how much grid-gap I actually end up adding.
I'm actually going to add a grid-gap of 10px,
and then 50px,
so it's going to be 50 in between each of them,
but the gap in between each of the rows
is only going to be 10.
Good.
Now, I've got this problem here
where every single paragraph, or every single element,
is now taking up a spot.
So what I really wanna do is
select all of the elements
and put them in this center column
that we're looking for here.
Let's go down here and grab the post,
and grab every single item that is a direct child
of our actual grid.
And we'll say, grid-column,
we're going to start at two,
and we're going to span one,
and that should put them all in the actual center column.
See, that's looking a lot better.
Alternatively, what you can also do is
you could say two, and then end two from the end,
and that's the exact same thing.
I think I might even prefer that,
in that, we'll just say, don't end right here,
but end right here.
And if I were to ever add another column of like 4fr,
that will then span.
See, now, it will span the two,
and leave this extra tip.
Because really,
I just want these two gutters on the left and the right,
and then I want all of the content to take up
whatever is in between.
So I like this sort of anchoring off the end there,
instead of assuming that it's always going to be a one.
So, we've got all of our items working here.
Let's start working with some of these figures here.
So, if we were to find one of them.
This is a figure.
I want it to span all the way across.
So, I'm gonna say .post>figure,
and let's first take the margin off of it.
Get rid of that.
And then, I'm going to make it span all the way across.
So we'll say grid-column: 1/-1,
and that will make it span all the way across,
and get this nice, super-wide image.
I'll also grab the figcaption.
Just make that font size 10. Make it look nice and small.
You could also,
if these images are a loading slowly for you,
it seems my Internet's a little bit slow right now,
you could just save them locally,
and then they'll load nice and quick.
All right, let's go on next to these block quotes
that we've got here.
So we've got, if we inspect them,
let's see, we have these block quotes,
and I want them to span all the way across, as well.
So we'll say, .post > blockquote.
I also want them to span the same as the figure tag.
And there, there we go!
And then we also wanna bump up the font size
on each of those.
So we'll say, font-size: 60,
font-style, text-align: center, and margin:0.
Beautiful! Looking good!
Now, we've got these tips here,
which need to go onto the left or to the right.
And, what they should do is they should just go
into the actual gutter of what, like,
right, if it were left, it should go right here,
and if it was right, it should go here.
So, let's first grab those tips.
So the tip, and the background,
let's just do FAFAFA.
Good!
And we'll add some padding of 10px to that.
Now, how do we get it to go to the left or the right?
So let's do the right ones first.
So, .tip, actually,
let's just do whatever this one is.
Let's see.
Left.
So, .tip-left.
We wanna say grid-column,
we wanna start at one, and go for one, right?
Because we wanna start right here,
and go just for one space wide.
And now, you see,
what happens is it will put it in the gutter,
and because this is now an open space,
and we have asked that our paragraph tags go in that space,
the browser'll say, "Ooh! That's an empty space.
"Don't mind if I do!
"I'll go ahead and use that myself."
So, on the left, we'll also do text-align: right,
and we'll say border-right: 2px solid, yellow.
Looking good.
Now, let's find another one of these tips,
that goes on the right-hand side.
I think there is one,
there we go.
This song is by Levi the Poet.
So, we'll grab .tip-right,
grid-column,
and, in this case, we want it to span one,
but end at the last column,
and then that will anchor it to the right-hand side,
and then we can take the, it's kinda the same idea,
but put the border on the left-hand side.
Beautiful!
And, I think we had one more.
This had an image in it,
and it seems to automatically be styling itself.
One thing that is,
kinda weird with this,
if one of these is really high,
like, let's search for bandcamp,
and put, like, a whole bunch of text in there,
you'll notice that,
it'll sort of force this to have a lot of empty space,
and that's sort of just how grid works.
But one thing you could do is
if you know that you're not going to have
a bunch of tips one after another,
you could also make these tips span a couple rows each.
So we'll take the post.
So we'll take a tip, and any tip will have a grid row,
and we'll just say a span like, span 3,
and what that will do is
it will span three high.
In this case, it's still not looking all that great.
So, I don't know, (laughs) you can span even more than that.
But, it's still is going to force the height.
And if there is not enough space,
it will simply just keep the text working while.
So here, it looks pretty good,
with the exception of the fact that it's really really high.
But that's easy to fix,
because we can just say something like align-self: start,
and then,
that will only go as high as it actually needs to,
instead of stretching high.
So, that's a bit of a,
that's a okay solution.
I'm not totally sold on that,
but it's looking pretty good, in my case there.
You could also, probably, absolute position them,
if you know that they're not gonna over lap each other.
So, we've got our quotes going all the way across.
We got our images going all the way across.
We've got our tips going in the left and the right,
and then we have all of our, sort of,
main reading content going down this main column here.
And, this is a layout that I really like,
because any time that you wanna be able to have
just a bit of a different reading experience,
there's no need to put in all these extra elements,
and all these extra divs, and wrap it around,
or even if you have something like WordPress,
and you were to tell the client,
"Make sure you wrap this in a div,"
(laughs) not gonna be able to necessarily do that.
So, having CSS Grid,
and being able to span it across
or whenever it is that you need, sort of,
default all of the text is in the middle column.
But if you want to span something across,
or you wanna stick something in the gutter,
it's pretty simple to do that.
So, hopefully, you enjoyed that one.
(hard rock music)